#summary All about the CDMA project.

= Introduction =

For almost 20 years, neutron and synchrotron facilities have been dreaming of a common data format to enable exchange of experimental results and exchange of the applications to analyse them. HDF5 as a physical container for data has gained consensus. The big issue of standardisation of data organisation remained. This is being addressed by the NeXus community, but is yet to deliver on the dream. In the meantime, by introducing a new level of indirection for data access, the CommonDataModelAccess (CDMA) framework provides a solution, allowing a separation of concern of data access and data organisation. Data access is handled by a CDMA data access plug-in, and data organisation is handled by the dictionary mechanism within CDMA. The dictionary is maintained by the facility or by an instrument manager. 

The CDMA is made of a core API that access data through data access plug-ins e.g. HDF5, and scientific applications definitions (sets of keywords). It is helpful, but not necessary to have a consensus between instrument techniques on these keywords. Using a innovative “mapping” system between keywords and data organisation, the CDMA allows development of data reduction applications with concern for data file format OR data organisation. If a facility uses HDF5 (which many do), the data access plug-in is available by default. Otherwise you can develop a data access plug-in for your chosen data file format e.g. XML, binary etc. All facilities are responsible for mapping between keywords and data organisation in their files. Thus, data reduction applications using CDMA can be developed from a strictly scientific point of view and be used to access data produced by any participating facility.


= Genesis of the project =

Working independently, ESRF, SOLEIL, DESY and ANSTO software development has recently focussed on the design of frameworks for data processing operating on top of a NeXus-like (NeXus data format: [http://www.nexusformat.org]) data storage layer.

The central issue for a collaboration was related to use of the same tools independent of the file storage data format. Work at ANSTO on the GumTree Data Model ([http://gumtree.codehaus.org]) abstracted data file access by designing a data model with a set of Java interfaces. This seemed to be a very promising development to share.

SOLEIL became soon interested in the concept as it was coincidentally looking for a unified data access layer based on NeXus (the standard data format used at SOLEIL) to build on top of it its COMETE ([http://comete.sourceforge.net]) project, a Java framework that aims to ease data visualisation and data analysis applications programming.

The collaboration started between ANSTO and SOLEIL in January, 2010. The work started from the data access layer of the ANSTO's GumTree project ([http://gumtree.codehaus.org/GumTree+Data+Model]), written in Java.
In 2011/Q4, DESY joined the collaboration to help develop the C++ port of CDMA.


= Our motivations =

*The data container and data organisation need not be an issue*.

The issue is: how to allow users of our facilities to use the same tools/applications to reduce data regardless of the origin of the data. Notice that even in the same facility, data isn't stored consistently across all beamlines/instruments.

The aim of the CDMA is to offer a abstract data access layer in order to build analysis/reduction applications regardless the data format. HDF-like formats allow the recording of any kind of data using an API. It abstracts the physical file organisation. The NeXus specification is a set of logical data organisations coordinated by a standardisation process involving a committee comprised of facility representatives. This organisation is applicable of various tree-oriented data formats (like HDF or XML). The problem of this approach is that facility must produce data files that strictly conform with the specification. It's an huge challenge because facility staff (mostly scientists & engineers)  have its own view on acquisition systems and experimental and contextual data. Often the hardware and the acquisition are not driven by the data recording system. This approach has been running since 2002 with no examples of data interchange. The flagship multi-facility data reduction tools such as Mantid ([http://mantidproject.org/]) require the developer to write a data loader for each instrument. 

The idea behind the CDMA is to reverse the data point of view. Rather than desperately try to standardise the data file organisation across facilities, isn't it easier to introduce a layer able to hide the different way the data is stored? We think the answer is yes!

Thus, each institute will continue to produce data using the most suitable format. No longer do we need to wait for a data organisation specification before running acquisitions and reducing data with common tools!
