#summary One-sentence summary of this page.
----
= Introduction =

The CDMA is made of:
 * a client layer API for writing data reduction and analysis applications.
 * a developer API to build data access plug-in.

Using the client API, data reduction applications developer don't have to know anything about the file formats because it uses an abstract data access layer that hide data files specifications.
The data files specifications are embedded through a plug-in mechanism. Therefore it's the institutes responsibility to develop their own data access plug-in in order to give the possibility to open datasets acquired in their institutes through the CDMA.

Nevertheless, using the navigation API, the developer have to precisely know the way the data is organised in each data file his application will access. We think it's a useless waste of time.
To solve this issue the CDMA introduce a new, innovative way, of accessing data. This is the dictionary mechanism.

Using this mechanism, data reduction application developer no longer have to known about the way the data is organised. The data is now accessed using keywords. A keyword is a short characters string naming a scientific measurement or a generic technical data. Thus the data access part of data reduction applications source code is simpler and, this is the most important, more stable.
Considering this mechanism, scientists have to agreed on key names, regardless the way the data is physically organised. Moreover, the data may have different units (wavelenght vs. energy for example) for the same measurement, the CDMA provide a mechanism to perform  conversions at run-time.
Please not that the old-style navigation API is still available but we strongly recommend to consider the dictionary API.
----

= The dictionary mechanism =

The point is: the way the data is organized into data files is no longer a issue on the data analysis software side.

The dictionary mechanism rely on two XML documents.

== Data definitions ==
The first document is a set a keywords matching scientific or technical data items. For instance a key named current should refer to the effective current in a storage ring at acquisition time. These keywords may be just listed by this document or organized through a tree hierarchy. In this last case, this document describe a particular a view on the data, like a NeXus application definition.
This document is intended to be independent of the way the data is physically organized.
There are (at least) two ways of writing this document: 
 * it may be written for a specific data analysis software which is already existent and adapted to use the CDMA,
 * or it may be written independently of any software like the NeXus application definitions.

== Keywords mapping ==
The second document is the dictionary itself. It's the mapping between keywords and real paths.
It needs a strong knowledge of the physical data organisation to be written.

== Responsibilities ==
Given a keywords list, the institutes that produce experimental data have to write the mapping document corresponding to their data files.
----

= The plug-in mechanism =

Using the CDMA library, data analysis developer don't have to care about data file format. The plug-in mechanism is able to dynamically load the plug-in (a dynamic library) able to get data from the data file the user is currently opening. Thus this mechanism allows an user to open files acquired in different institutes, in the same session.